# KDF: Key Derivation Function

TODOs:

 - cross reference to chapter and section

As mentioned in chapter 3, the KDF is used to make a brute-force attack expensive and indeed infeasable. An attacker with access to the `salt` and `--wallet-name` but **without** access to the `brainkey` should not be able to recover the wallet of the owner.

With the `sbk.kdf` module we have a few concerns and things we need to accomodate for.

 1. Provide an API for correct use of the `argon2` library.
 2. Encode/decode KDF parameters in compact format.
 3. Encode/decode KDF parameters in a way that can represent a wide range of difficulties.
 4. Enable a progress meter so that even expensive key derivation does not lock up the UI.


## API of `sbk.kdf`

!!! aside "Aside"

    The static typing provided by mypy has some limitations. To my knowledge, it is not possible to create a new type that fundamentally a primitive, but which the type checker will validate as a separate type. This means that such "types" as `NumThreads = int` here (and throughout the sbk project) mostly serve as documentation. The type checker will complain if you pass a `str` where `NumThreads` is expected, but it will not notice if you use `MebiBytes` because they are both `int` as far as mypy is concerned.

    This is the first occurance of this pattern in the `sbk` package, and I won't belabour this point in later chapters.


```python
NumThreads  = int
MebiBytes   = int
Iterations  = int
HashAlgoVal = int
Seconds     = float

# types for progress bar
Increment = float
ProgressCallback = typ.Callable[[Increment], None]
MaybeProgressCallback = typ.Optional[ProgressCallback]
```


```python
class KDFParams(typ.NamedTuple):

    p_raw: NumThreads
    m_raw: MebiBytes
    t_raw: Iterations
    h    : HashAlgoVal

    def encode(self) -> int:
        ...

    @staticmethod
    def decode(fields: int) -> 'KDFParams':
        ...


def init_kdf_params(p: NumThreads, m: MebiBytes, t: Iterations) -> KDFParams:
    ...


def digest(
    data       : bytes,
    kdf_params : KDFParams,
    hash_len   : int,
    progress_cb: MaybeProgressCallback = None,
) -> bytes:
    ...
```


## Parameter Encoding and Rounding

In the encoded form, I have only afforded a total of 16 bits for the encoding of the parameters `p`, `m` and `t`. Roughly speaking, they are encoded on a logorithmic scale. The scaling and rounding is done in a way that:

 1. the smallest value is 1,
 2. no two encoded values are mapped to the same parameter value,
 3. we can encode parameter choices that are quite expensive (in todays terms)

Given these constraints, the choice of scale is somewhat arbitrary and I won't pretend there is any other justification than what I thought looked ok. If the choices made here turn out to be inadiquate, we'll have to burn a version number.

As we're trying to map a set of encoded values to decoded parameter values (and vise versa), I'll use these equations with hardcoded parameters `offset`, `scale`, `rate` which control the starting point, scale and rate of accelleration respectively. Another way to think of these is that the `rate` is used to control how precise the parameters can be chosen, while `offset` and `scale` are used to fit the curve to satisfy the three criteria above.

```math
encode(n) = ⌊ \mathit{offset} + \mathit{scale} × \mathit{rate}^{n} ⌋
\newline
decode(n) = ⌊ \mathit{offset} + \mathit{scale} × \mathit{rate}^{n} ⌋
```

For the parameter `p` I have roughly chosen `base=2`, .
 4. the encoded cost parameters for `m` and `t` are within ±10% of the chosen parameters.

This seems appropriate, as the number of cores on machines appears to follow that curve (more or less). The parameters `m` and `t` are encoded using `base=1.2`. These choices were done based on twiddling with the following code until they satisfied the above criteria.


```python

```


```python
# lp: param_rounding
def _exp(field_val: int, base: float) -> int:
    s = 1 / (base - 1)
    o = 1 - s
    return math.floor(o + s * base ** field_val)
```


```python
# lp: param_rounding
def _log(raw_val: int, base: float) -> int:
    s = 1 / (base - 1)
    o = 1 - s
    return round(math.log((raw_val - o) / s) / math.log(base))
```


```python
# lp: param_rounding
def _clamp(val: int, lo: int, hi: int) -> int:
    return max(lo, min(hi, val))
```


## Implementation of `sbk.kdf`

We generate a python module and a test script.

```python
# lp_file: src/sbk/sbk.py

```
